update ARIA state or property has valid value rule to current writing style (#1433)
act-rules/act-rules.github.io: _rules/aria-state-or-property-valid-value-6a7281.md

## Applicability

Any [WAI-ARIA 1.1 state or property](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.1/#state_prop_def) that is not empty (""), and that is specified on an HTML or SVG element.
The rule applies to any [WAI-ARIA 1.1 state or property][] that is not empty (`""`), and is specified on an HTML or SVG element.

## Expectation

Each test target has a valid value according to its [WAI-ARIA 1.1 value type](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.1/#propcharacteristic_value).

For value types `ID Reference` and `ID Reference List` for [WAI-ARIA required properties](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.1/#requiredState) at least one of the elements with the given ids exists in the same [document tree](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#document-trees) or [shadow tree](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#shadow-trees) as the element that specifies the target attribute.

> For value type `URI` the value matches the [generic URI syntax](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.txt).

Reviewer: Not sure why these have suddenly been removed 🤔 

Maybe it would be clearer to have them as second and third expectation?

Author: @Jym77 see [issue](https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/issues/1432), for reasoning as to why this was removed.

Reviewer: If we remove that requirement, we need to clean more traces of it elsewhere in the rule… So, at least:
1. In the expectation, precise that "valid value" does not mean "existing IDref" given that the discussion in #1432 is about that.
2. Replace the Background note about "IDref must exist on required property" by something summing up #1432 and explaining why we don't require existing IDref.
3. Remove traces of it from the example descriptions. Not need to have a description about which case the IDref must or not exist since this is not part of the rule anymore.

Author: @Jym77, 

For:
1) I disagree, the point of moving this section to background, was not to pollute the expectation with extra details. I believe keeping expectation precise and to the point that adding edge cases is better.
2) Again, I read through the background description & seems just right. I also believe after a conclusion has been reached to #1432, perhaps this can be improved. So leaving as is.
3) I disagree. Good to have longer descriptions than leaving it open.

I will see if similar reviews are arrived from over reviewers, to take any action on them. In the meantime dismissing this.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @Jym77 on this. ARIA 1.1 says an IDREF must exist, and for IDREFs that at least one of them must. Since that's not what this rule (should) require, we need to include an exception for it in the expectation.

Author: I have added a simple note.

Reviewer 2: Notes can not contain requirements. Please put this as an exception in the expectation text.

> Each test target has a valid value according to its [WAI-ARIA 1.1 value type][]. For [WAI-ARIA required properties][] with [value type][] of `ID reference` and `ID reference list` at least one of the referenced elements with the given ids should exist in the same [document tree][] or [shadow tree][].

Reviewer 2: Can you please review the comments again? This rule stats that these only need to exist if the ARIA attribute is required for that role.

## Applicability

> The rule applies to any HTML or SVG element that has any not empty (`""`) [WAI-ARIA 1.1 state or property][] specified.

Reviewer: We actually should have examples (Passed and Failed) with SVG element, since they are applicable.

Author: I see your point. I have updated the applicability so it relies still on the state or property.

## Expectation

> Each test target has a valid value according to its [WAI-ARIA 1.1 value type][].

Reviewer: That is not correct anymore. With the new Applicability, the test targets are elements, not `aria-*` attributes. HTML/SVG elements do not have a "WAI-ARIA value type".

Author: This should solve this.

> For value types `ID Reference` and `ID Reference List` for [WAI-ARIA required properties][] at least one of the elements with the given ids exists in the same [document tree][] or [shadow tree][] as the element that specifies the target attribute.

Reviewer: This somehow needs to mention the role of the element the property is on. Because required property depend on role.

Author: @Jym77 are you suggesting that we make elements that do not have a role attribute as inapplicable to this rule?

Reviewer: Not sure what I was thinking about either… 🤷

For value type `URI` the value matches the [generic URI syntax][].

**Note:** Only for [WAI-ARIA required properties][] with value types `ID Reference` and `ID Reference List` is there a requirement that the elements with the given ids actually exists. For non-required properties, this is not a requirement.

**Note:**

> For value type `URI`, this rule does not require that the destination URI exists.

Reviewer: The notes could probably move to the Background section. The first one might be expanded a bit to explain why this extra requirement is only for required properties (why is it OK for non-required properties to reference non-existing IDs).
(the second note is fairly obvious: the rule checks the syntax of the URL, but is not a broken link checker)

## Assumptions

> - This rule catches values that are undefined in [WAI-ARIA Specifications][], and where the resulting behavior in user agents are also undefined in WAI-ARIA. This might lead to accessibility issues, if the intention was to use behavior defined in [WAI-ARIA Specifications][]. When values are used that do not have a defined behavior in [WAI-ARIA Specifications][], the HTML/SVG specification decides what default values should be used, since it is defined here what should happen when an invalid value is used for an attribute. If the default value for invalid attribute values happens to match the author's intention for the value, there will not be an accessibility issue.

Reviewer: I'd make this a bit more direct:
```suggestion
- This rule assumes that the default value of the attributes do not match the author's intention. ARIA state and properties have a default value as defined in the [WAI-ARIA Specifications][], and this default is used when the provided value is invalid. In some case, the default value may happen to match the author's intention in using this attribute. In such a case, the rule will fail without creating an accessibility issue.
```

> - This rule catches values that are undefined in [WAI-ARIA Specifications][], and where the resulting behavior in user agents are also undefined in WAI-ARIA. This might lead to accessibility issues, if the intention was to use behavior defined in [WAI-ARIA Specifications][]. When values are used that do not have a defined behavior in [WAI-ARIA Specifications][], the HTML/SVG specification decides what default values should be used, since it is defined here what should happen when an invalid value is used for an attribute. If the default value for invalid attribute values happens to match the author's intention for the value, there will not be an accessibility issue.

Reviewer: I'm also not sure we need the bullet list when there is only one item in it.

## Accessibility Support

> - Some user agents treat the value of `aria-*` attribute as case-sensitive (even when these are not ID) while some treat them as case-insensitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Some user agents treat the value of `aria-*` attributes as case-sensitive (even when these are not ID) while some treat them as case-insensitive.
```
```suggestion
- Some user agents treat the value of `aria-*` attribute as case-sensitive (even when these are not ID) while some treat them as case-insensitive.
```

> - Some user agents treat the value of `aria-*` attribute as case-sensitive (even when these are not ID) while some treat them as case-insensitive.

Reviewer: I'm also not sure we need the bullet list when there is only one item in it.

- [Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax (RFC 3986)](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.txt)

Depending on the role of an elements, certain WAI-ARIA properties are or not required. This rule considers that when such a property has a value type of `ID reference` or `ID reference list`, then an element with one of the given ids must exist. On another hand, if a property that is not required refers to an incorrect id, it is less clear that this will cause an accessibility issue (the property is not required on the first place, so the element can live without it, and maybe later interaction with the page will create the correct id and this is the intended behavior). Therefore, the rule has no extra requirement for properties with type `ID reference` or `ID reference list` that are not required.

For value type `URI`, this rule does not require that the destination URI exists. Testing that the link is not dead is out of scope for the rule and therefore ignored.

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

This `div` element has an `aria-required` property with valid `true/false` value.

```html

> <div role="textbox" aria-required="true" aria-label="A required textbox"></div>

Reviewer 2: Why are we using divs for this at all? Couldn't we just use native elements here? I think a mix of native and ARIA role elements would be better.

- [WAI-ARIA 1.1, Characteristics of States and Properties, Value](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/#propcharacteristic_value)
- [Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax (RFC 3986)](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.txt)

> **Note:** Only for [WAI-ARIA required properties][] with value types `ID Reference` and `ID Reference List` is there a requirement that the elements with the given ids actually exists. For non-required properties, this is not a requirement.

Reviewer: I feel we need to say **why** the requirement is sometimes here, sometimes not. Instead of just saying that there is a difference.
```suggestion
Depending on the role of an elements, certain WAI-ARIA properties are or not required. This rule considers that when such a property has a value type of `ID reference` or `ID reference list`, then an element with one of the given ids must exist. On another hand, if a property that is not required refers to an incorrect id, it is less clear that this will cause an accessibility issue (the property is not required on the first place, so the element can live without it, and maybe later interaction with the page will create the correct id and this is the intended behaviour). Therefore, the rule has no extra requirement for properties with type `ID reference` or `ID reference list` that are not required.
```
+ links, and maybe polishing a bit the text.

> **Note:**
> For value type `URI`, this rule does not require that the destination URI exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For value type `URI`, this rule does not require that the destination URI exists. Testing that the link is not dead is out of scope for the rule and therefore ignored.
```

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

This `div` element has an `aria-required` property with valid `true/false` value.

```html
<div role="textbox" aria-required="true" aria-label="A required textbox"></div>
```

#### Passed Example 2

This `div` element has an `aria-expanded` state with valid `true/false/undefined` value.

```html
<div role="button" aria-expanded="undefined">A button</div>
```

#### Passed Example 3

This `div` element has an `aria-pressed` state with valid tristate value.

```html
<div role="button" aria-pressed="mixed">An other button</div>
```

#### Passed Example 4

This `div` element has an `aria-errormessage` property with valid ID reference value.

```html

> <div id="my-error">Please provide a valid username</div>

Reviewer: As a matter of fact, `aria-errormessage` is **not** required by `textbox`.
I think it is good to show that part of the rule in action. I suggest:
* remove the `div id="my-error"`.
* update the description to say that `aria-errormessage` is not required, so we don't care that the id is missing. Maybe adding a mollifying sentence in the line of "presumably, the error message (with the correct id) will be added by scripting when an error is detected".
* re-order the examples to have "required ID" before "not-required ID" so that a logical sequence follows. (and keep "required ID list" close to them).

#### Passed Example 1

This `div` element has an `aria-required` property with valid `true/false` value.

```html
<div role="textbox" aria-required="true" aria-label="A required textbox"></div>
```

#### Passed Example 2

This `div` element has an `aria-expanded` state with valid `true/false/undefined` value.

```html
<div role="button" aria-expanded="undefined">A button</div>
```

#### Passed Example 3

This `div` element has an `aria-pressed` state with valid tristate value.

```html
<div role="button" aria-pressed="mixed">An other button</div>
```

#### Passed Example 4

> This `div` element has an `aria-errormessage` property with valid ID reference value.

Reviewer: Given that no element with that ID exist here, an explanation about the property not being required is needed.

```html
<div role="textbox" aria-errormessage="my-error" aria-label="A textbox"></div>
```

#### Passed Example 5

> This `div` element has an `aria-owns` property with valid ID reference list value.

Reviewer: There are 3 `div` in that example, so "**this** `div`" is not well defined.

Plus, add explanation on whether the IDs need to exist or not.

```

#### Passed Example 8
#### Passed Example 7

`aria-placeholder` property with valid string value
This `div` element has an `aria-placeholder` property with valid string value.

```html
<div role="textbox" aria-placeholder="MM-DD-YYYY" aria-label="Your birthdate">
	MM-DD-YYYY
</div>
```

#### Passed Example 9
#### Passed Example 8

`aria-dropeffect` property with valid token list value
This `div` element has an `aria-dropeffect` property with valid token list value.

```html
<div role="dialog" aria-dropeffect="copy move"></div>
```

#### Passed Example 10
#### Passed Example 9

`aria-controls`, which is a required property for the role `scrollbar`, has `ID Reference list` that references at least one element existing in the same document tree.
The second `div` element has an `aria-controls`, which is a required property for the role `scrollbar`, has `ID Reference list` that references at least one element existing in the same document tree.

```html
<div id="content1">Lorem ipsum...</div>
<div
	role="scrollbar"
	aria-controls="content1 content2"
	aria-orientation="vertical"
	aria-valuemax="100"
	aria-valuemin="0"

> 	aria-valuenow="25"

Reviewer 2: Lets leave aria-valuenow on here. In ARIA 1.2 it no longer has a default.

#### Passed Example 9

This `div` element has an `aria-dropeffect` property with valid token list value.

```html
<div role="dialog" aria-dropeffect="copy move"></div>
```

#### Passed Example 10

> The second `div` element has an `aria-controls`, which is a required property for the role `scrollbar`, has `ID Reference list` that references at least one element existing in the same document tree.

Reviewer: This example feels overly complicated due to the many other `aria-*` attributes in it. Could we achieve the same thing with less attributes? (i.e., make the example atomic testing only one thing)

Author: It is not a MUST to set other aria-*, except aria-controls, so I have updated accordingly.

This `div` element has an `aria-pressed` state with invalid tristate value.

```html
<div role="button" aria-pressed="horizontal">An other button</div>
```

#### Failed Example 4

This `div` element has an `aria-errormessage` property with invalid ID reference value, since space is not allowed in a single ID.

```html
<div role="textbox" aria-errormessage="error1 error2" aria-label="A textbox with an error"></div>
```

#### Failed Example 5

This `div` element has an `aria-rowindex` property with invalid integer value.

```html
<div role="gridcell" aria-rowindex="2.5">Fred</div>
```

#### Failed Example 6

This `div` element has an `aria-valuemin`, `aria-valuemax` and `aria-valuenow` property with invalid number values.

```html
<div role="spinbutton" aria-valuemin="one" aria-valuemax="three" aria-valuenow="two" aria-label="Choose a value"></div>
```

#### Failed Example 7

This `div` element has an `aria-live` property with invalid token value.

```html
<div role="main" aria-live="nope"></div>
```

#### Failed Example 8

This `div` element has an Element with invalid token list value.

```html
<div role="dialog" aria-dropeffect="invalid move"></div>
```

#### Failed Example 9

> This `div` element has an `aria-expanded` state with invalid `true/false/`undefined` value for custom element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This `div` element has an `aria-expanded` state with invalid `true/false/undefined` value for custom element.
```
```suggestion
This `div` element has an `aria-expanded` state with invalid `true/false/`undefined` value for custom element.
```

```html
<my-button role="button" aria-expanded="collapsed">My button</my-button>
```

#### Failed Example 10

> This `div` element has an `aria-controls`, which is a required property for the role `scrollbar`, references an element that does not exist in the same document tree.

Reviewer: Same as Passed Example 10. Especially here since some of the attributes are OK and some aren't.
